The global development of the planet, and at the same
time it is decided to be our today's planet.
That's why one of the tasks of the university is,
in fact, the one that appears today in such a
good trend.
It is, of course, the work between the countries.
That is, we have a big one.
If we were earlier proud of our connections with large
universities, and they are still there.
We are now developing our national economy,
our national universities,
so to speak, why should I say, when we offered
to support the energy industry here, which is good for
us, I immediately agreed to be there.
I was asked to be the director of the university.
That is why,
and on the other hand, the university is now much
more powerful.
I am very interested in the playbook.
Let's imagine that if you listen to someone who will
try to open his own voice, listen to this playbook.
One of the points of this playbook was that it
would be a magnet for a cool talent.
And then to choose the rules of the day to
make it easier for them to create.
Maybe there are some more moments that are important for
the creation of the universe.
How will they create?
What are the recommendations of a person who wants to
create a new universe?
Well, first of all, I will say that, in general,
the existence of the universe needs more than the existence
of the universe.
Okay, first of all, it is good.
Yes, yes, yes.
Maybe we will do it again.
Yes,
yes.
Second,
if you look, I was trying to
enter academic processes,
especially not to enter.
Why?
Because even after the fall of the university,
I worked with a student, but it was individual.
But he never read the lectures.
Why, by the way?
Well, Vesh, I can't read.
And also...
You are a new person, right?
I will always change.
Now we will talk about it.
In the end, it is the same two hours.
You will read it.
I will talk about it.
About the same, but about other words.
Maybe about other scenarios.
Therefore,
I have already spoken for a short time.
Maybe we can start a parallel work with the work
of the lectures.
And read something.
I explained it like this.
But the last time we talked about it with a
new teacher, our Erhan Sadik, he didn't say it either.
I said, well, let me think about it.
Well, I promised that maybe in September, something will come
up.
What course would you like to study?
Well, it should be such a interdisciplinary course.
Because I decided, when I came back to Kazakhstan, I
was engaged in more diplomatic work.
I switched to climate, and so on.
And then when I went to a project at Zarbayev
University, I was engaged in science.
Because I was engaged in science there, in Kurchatsetsk University
in Moscow,
after a party, and for 20 years, such a beautiful
and good science.
And in the 60s, he taught the public to write
about it.
Well, even there, I have already done that.
That's why,
when I was not engaged in science,
I said, I don't teach.
I said, no, but still, it's still there.
Well, let it be such a great lesson.
That's why it allowed me to pay attention to all
disciplines.
In addition to physics, I mean medicine, biology, and the
environment, I mean, science.
And otherwise, if you learn, and you start to control
something, then you will definitely be moving in this particular
area, which is like a science.
You can't be objective for all, let's say, your employees.
That's why it's some prohibition, which I think I should
put myself in.
And I'm calm to consider all this science.
I will say, the physics of plasma, to forget about
it.
By the way, Gilbert, his mother -in -law, he was
interested in the approach,
that is, he was supposed to give it to him,
and he came up with an idea
every time, with the topic of
the mother -in -law, which he wants to learn himself.
That is, then he has an interesting interest to go
to the arena and with students to learn this new
sphere, and then he has an interest to learn it.
So he wants to learn how you do not want
to tell what he already knows.
This is a good example.
I brought it to you.
I thought about it like this, that you need to
find such an example, an elective, to be interested in
it, and at the same time, you use all the
technologies that are used for this time, I bought it,
and all the time, I use it to learn the
experience that I have.
That is why it is in the center of my
mind.
That is why,
I also look at what I am looking at.
For example, even the quality of a good example you
have checked.
I encourage students to learn, to invest in it, which
I like.
Asmology, astrophysics,
at some point, we met George Smut, on one of
the conferences.
We talked about it when he said it was like
a Nobel Prize, everything, as an astrophysic cosmology,
I talked about this big band, I heard it, but
we talked about it very well, in the scientific plan.
Then I talked, and in fact, at this moment, we
started creating
an enerhicismic laboratory,
in which after the work of the FN university, it
was very unique, immediately, it was very interesting, I'm just
telling you that it's really unique that there are a
lot of modest resources that we've been able to bring
today.
In which interest is in the whole world.
I'll tell you that.
Gama вспleski, which is observed in the universe.
What's interesting is the origin of the phenomenon.
At the time, there was an attempt to follow the
American NASA.
At the moment, they said that it would be a
trial of nuclear weapons.
And there was an attempt to look at Gama вспleski.
They were trying to find out what they were trying
to do.
It was the coldest time.
This attempt was not done, but it was observed.
They said everything was already in the past.
They were already in the Gama вспleski.
The panic was going out.
It was not on earth.
They were looking at the story of the situation.
After that,
the other task started.
Gama вспleski has to be on the other side.
He is from the surface from the earth.
What's the problem?
It's a powerful energy division.
in the process of the interaction between, let's say, the
neutron star and the black hole, or the surface of
the Sun, at the very first moment, the powerful gamma
-splits with the power of the solar energy, then the
light of the energy, the light of the light,
and immediately got into the scientific interest, naturally, and began
to look at it, then began to observe these things.
After the light, in the visible light,
the Earth began to look at it.
The idea we decided to implement, because it was quite
modest in financial resources, and we created a laboratory
at the University of Moscow.
And we put a telescope here in the village of
Urgenia together with...
In the village of Urgenia, right?
It is located on a square that has an astrophysic
institute, and it is located on our partner.
And the telescope is, in a small way, only a
meter size, for example.
But its peculiarity is that when we discussed it, we
had to make it as fast as possible, because the
gamma -splits happens literally for about 10 seconds.
Then, after the light is gone, we could even say,
for hours, minutes, seconds, and even days.
It was just like that.
And then we had to make it up.
It was important, as quickly as possible, to open it.
The satellite registers the gamma -splits and gives the Earth
a signal, that there is a satellite in the sky.
And who, at the time,
has no opportunity, at the first night, at the third
night,
is able to turn all the planets around the Earth.
The planets are trying to find this satellite.
And the faster you find it, the sooner you will
be able to observe it.
And the telescope in Kazakhstan, until today, it is a
record on speed and speed.
Because we have this telescope, it is made of a
standard telescope, which is covered with this kind of diaphragm.
And it is made of this kind of...
You know, a telescope is made of a tube.
And it takes about 8 seconds.
And we started to observe it
after the arrival of a team from the satellite.
After 30 -40 seconds, we started to observe the light.
And after the next telescope, which is located there,
there are hundreds of seconds and so on.
This is still known,
and in this regard with our honesty, the group that
works,
the large groups of scientists in different countries.
Because there are two of them.
This is the first one.
Who knows, who knows, who knows.
And so on.
We must exchange these data.
And the second one is that there are the first
seconds and millions of data from this time, from
this time.
And we will share it with them together.
Let's talk about the wider audience.
Why is the satellite interested in scientific research?
Well, you see,
in general,
imagine yourself,
why I am interested in you.
Not only because the satellite is interested in you, but
we are deeply interested in it.
We move on the territory, there is something there.
We move on the sea,
and we have only the steppe, there is a winter
Chinese frontier, and nothing like that.
That's why I think that when I was always interested
in something, I was not interested in it.
The universe is an element of love.
Motivation is still love.
I do not understand any other motivation.
I mean, you know more than today.
You know, this is my motivation, right?
That's why
we still study.
Today, after the last research I was interested in the
telescope, which was placed in the cosmos.
It appeared to me that there were big bands, and
so on.
That's why we model the universe, it is periodically
transformed,
and so on.
So, you know what happens in the universe?
How do the processes change?
These are the same physical processes that allow you to
understand the physics here.
So,
this is purely scientific interest, how we are built there.
That's why I think that this is the main task,
why we study the cosmos, and because we need to
do nothing.
Yes.
You can remember three things.
Three the most bright memories for you, from 16 years
in the university.
The bright ones?
Yes.
You know, I am such a person, I don't have
any bright ones.
No, I was told about the cosmic laboratory.
Yes.
It's really good.
The second is
the bright memories that is, I think there was a
young man who managed to get there.
That is, I was
born
as you live in your own world.